What are your convenient times?
Our text for today discusses
one of the temptations
that Satan presented to Jesus.
Luke 4:13 later says
that then Satan goes away
to return at “another convenient time”
to tempt Jesus.
So with all that in mind, we’re going
to consider three questions today:
(1) What were these three temptations
really about?
(2) Did Satan ever find a convenient time
to come back and tempt Jesus?
(3) Does Satan try to use
these temptations today?
We’re going to look at Matthew’s account
of these three temptations
and try to answer those questions.
So let’s start first with Matthew 4:2, 3.
It says: “After he had fasted
for 40 days and 40 nights,
“he felt hungry.
“And the Tempter approached and said to him:
“‘If you are a son of God,
tell these stones
to become loaves of bread.’”
Now, our first question is,
What was at the root of this temptation?
Well, Satan knew full well
that Jesus was Jehovah’s firstborn Son,
but he was trying to get Jesus to question
that he was who Jehovah said he was.
‘If you are a son of God,
‘why hasn’t your Father fed you?
Can you really trust Jehovah
to take care of you?’
See, Satan wanted Jesus
to begin to question Jehovah’s care
and use his position to benefit himself.
Well, Jesus recognized
that this was a temptation,
and he did not fall for it.
Question two is, Did Satan ever come back
and try this trick again with Jesus?
Well, when Jesus was arrested,
could that have been a convenient time?
Remember, Jesus said that he
could have called on “12 legions of angels”
to come and save him.
Could that have been a temptation
to save himself?
Or remember when he was on the stake,
the rulers and the soldiers
taunted him and said,
‘If you are a son of God,
come on down off the stake!’
It’s interesting that they used
the same terminology.
Could that have been a temptation?
No.
Jesus trusted
that Jehovah would take care of him.
Now, our third question is,
Does Satan use that temptation today?
Well, we are living in unsettled times.
Are these convenient times for Satan?
Our families and our friends may be in need.
Could we be tempted to question
if we really trust
that Jehovah is going to take care of them?
Could we be convinced or convince ourselves
that we may need to take matters
into our own hands?
Are we ever tempted
to use our privileges of service
to benefit ourselves?
Let’s look at the second temptation.
Matthew 4:5, 6 says:
“Then the Devil took him along
into the holy city,
“and he stationed him
on the battlement of the temple
“and said to him: ‘If you are a son of God,
“‘throw yourself down, for it is written:
“‘“He will give his angels a command
concerning you,”
“‘and, “They will carry you on their hands,
so that you may not strike your foot
against a stone.”’”
Again, what was the root here?
Well, Satan was again trying
to cast doubt on who Jesus was.
‘If you are who you say you are, prove it.
‘Let’s see if Jehovah
really is there for you.
‘He does value you.
‘He’ll save you because Psalms says
that’s what he’ll do
for the real Son of God.’
Well, Jesus saw that this was a temptation
and did not fall for it.
Now, did Satan ever try
such a temptation again?
Well, perhaps another time
is what’s recorded at Mark 8:11,
where the Pharisees came,
and the account says
they “started disputing with him,
demanding from him a sign from heaven,
to put him to the test.”
Now, Jesus had just healed
a deaf and speechless man
and miraculously fed over 4,000 people,
but that wasn’t enough for them.
They wanted something spectacular.
‘Throw yourself off the temple or something.
‘Prove you are who you say you are.
Let’s see if Jehovah really values you.’
Now, when might we face a similar temptation?
Well, some of our brothers and sisters
may feel unlovable
because of events in their life.
Times of isolation and depression
may be convenient times
for Satan to attack them.
‘Am I sure Jehovah really loves me?
‘Am I sure I’m important to Jehovah?
Do I have value?’
Well, such feelings have caused ones
to stop serving Jehovah
or to seek validation of their value
through unscriptural means.
Look at our third temptation.
Matthew 4:8, 9:
“Again the Devil took him along
to an unusually high mountain
“and showed him all the kingdoms of the world
and their glory.
“And he said to him:
‘All these things I will give you
if you fall down
and do an act of worship to me.’”
So, what was Satan offering here?
‘Don’t wait! You can have it now.
‘You know what’s coming
—the pain that’s coming.
My offer is better than Jehovah’s.’
Again, Jesus recognized
what Satan was doing,
and he resisted that temptation.
Did Satan ever find a convenient time
to try that again?
Well, perhaps the account
at Luke 6:15 explains
what may have been another convenient time.
Remember, the people wanted
Jesus to begin ruling right then.
Could that have been a temptation
to get his Kingdom started
without the pain of being tortured to death?
Well, knowing that the people
were coming for him,
Jesus withdrew.
Do we face similar temptations today?
Well, we willingly make sacrifices
and have made sacrifices to serve Jehovah.
But we may see what others do
and what others have and wonder:
‘Are our sacrifices really worth it?
‘Is there any way I can have it now?
‘Maybe if there’s a way I can make
some more money, I could do both
and have the things I want.’
You see, three powerful temptations:
Can you trust that your Father
will take care of you?
Are you sure Jehovah loves you
and you have value?
Why wait when you can have it now?
So again, the question is,
What are your convenient times?
What are my convenient times?
Satan is going to find convenient times
to tempt us—that’s a given.
First Peter 5:8 says that he’s out there
“like a roaring lion,
seeking to devour [us].”
If he found convenient times to tempt Jesus,
we can be sure
that he will do the same to us.
What do we need to do?
Our job is to resist his temptations.
How do we do that?
The same way that Jesus did.
Did you notice the two things he did?
(1) Jesus recognized
when he was being tempted,
and (2) at that moment,
he focused on Jehovah.
It’s interesting
that in every one of his responses to Satan,
he used Jehovah’s name.
See, Jehovah’s name is a powerful protection
against Satan’s attacks.
That’s why Jesus listed praying to Jehovah
to resist temptation,
to resist the wicked one,
as a fundamental part when he was teaching
his disciples how to pray.
That’s why Jesus said that he made
Jehovah’s name known to his followers.
That’s why Proverbs 18:10 tells us
that Jehovah’s name
“is a strong tower”
that we can run to for protection.
See, speaking with Jehovah, using his name,
and meditating on his name
and everything that it means
can help us when we are being tempted
by Satan
—when he finds convenient times to attack us.
And if we do that, what will be the result?
Well, notice the guarantee that we have
at Psalm 44:5
—Psalm 44:5.
It says: “By your power
“we will drive back our adversaries;
“in your name
“we will trample down
those who rise up against us.”
Yes, all of us are going to find times
that Satan finds convenient to tempt us.
When that happens,
may we be sensitive to recognize
that it is a temptation
and then look to Jehovah
and focus on his name.
And if we do, we can have the confidence
that as this psalm says, this will help—
Jehovah’s name will help us
to drive back and trample
those who rise against us individually
and as an organization.